@node The Current Environment
@chapter The Current Environment
@label(current-environment)
@index(Current environment)

@menu
* Different Scopes::
* Shadowing::
@end menu

@node Different Scopes, Shadowing, The Current Environment, The Current Environment
@section(Different Scopes)
In @hemlock the values of @i{variables}, @i{key-bindings} and
@i{character-attributes} may depend on the @f{current-buffer} and the
modes active in it @pageref{variables}, @pageref{key-bindings}, 
@pageref{character-attributes}, @funref{current-buffer}.  There are
three possible scopes for @hemlock values:
@enumerate
@item
@i{buffer local}:The value is present only if the buffer it is local
to is the @f{current-buffer}.

@item
@i{mode local}:The value is present only when the mode it is local to
is active in the @f{current-buffer}.

@item
@i{global}:The value is always present unless shadowed by a buffer or
mode local value.
@end enumerate


@node Shadowing,  , Different Scopes, The Current Environment
@section(Shadowing)
    It is possible for there to be a conflict between different values
for the same thing in different scopes.  For example, there be might a
global binding for a given variable and also a local binding in the
current buffer.  Whenever there is a conflict shadowing occurs,
permitting only one of the values to be visible in the current
environment.

    The process of resolving such a conflict can be described as a
search down a list of places where the value might be defined, returning
the first value found.  The order for the search is as follows:
@enumerate
@item
Local values in the current buffer.

@item
Mode local values in the minor modes of the current buffer, in order
from the highest precedence mode to the lowest precedence mode.  The
order of minor modes with equal precedences is undefined.

@item
Mode local values in the current buffer's major mode.

@item
Global values.
@end enumerate
